xscape Tools

Ran Libeskind-Hadas, Jessica Yi-Chieh Wu, Mukul Bansal
Version 0.0.4 released on November 23, 2014 
(See VERSION NOTES below for updates since first release)

See also: www.cs.hmc.edu/~hadas/xscape 

WHAT'S INCLUDED 

The xscape programs are found in the bin directory which includes:

* costscape.py:    Visualize the landscape of optimal solutions
* sigscape.py:     Visualize the landscape of statistical significance
* eventscape.py:   Enumerate the events in each region and the events
  		   common to multiple regions.
* tree2newick:	   Convert trees in .tree format into .newick format
* view_tanglegram: View the tanglegram 

REQUIREMENTS

These tools require Python 2.7.x and the following packages:

* matplotlib
* BioPython
* shapely

All of these packages are included in the Enthought Python Canopy suite 
which provides a full version of Python 2.7.3.

https://www.enthought.com/products/epd/free/

USAGE

Run from the command line using

costscape
sigscape
eventscape
view_tanglegram
tree2newick

If the path variables on the local machine are not set appropriately, the 
following will set them...

export PATH=$PATH:<xscape path>/bin
export PYTHONPATH=$PYTHONPATH:<xscape path>/python

... where <xscape path> denotes the path to the directory where the xscape tools
have been installed.

INPUT AND OUTPUT

Costscape, sigscape, and eventscape prompt the user for the names of input
and output files and arguments.

INPUT FILE

The input file comprises a species/host tree followed by a gene/parasite tree
in newick format with internal node names: (LeftTree, RightTree) Root;
The node names cannot be numeric (although they can be alpha-numeric).

Immediately following the two newick trees is a list of tip associations 
with one entry per line of the form...

g:s

... where p is the name of a gene/parasite tip and s is the name of a 
species/host tip.

The name of the input file should end with .newick

Sample files are provided in the examples directory.

OUTPUT FILE

All three programs will save to output files.  Costscape and sigscape will 
save the plots to .pdf files and eventscape saves to a .csv file that can
be opened and manipulated in programs such as Excel.  In costscape and sigscape
the output file name is optional:  They provide another option to display the
plots using matplotlibs display facilities.  They also print summary data in
the terminal window.

ARGUMENTS

In addition, these programs prompt for the range of transfer and loss costs
relative to the normalized unit cost of duplication.  Speciation cost is fixed to 0.

COSTSCAPE IN DETAIL

The program produces a plot in which the x-axis represents the range of loss
costs and the y-axis represents the range of transfer costs.  The cost
space is then divided into color-coded "regions" where each region
represents a subset of the cost space where optimal solutions will be
the same.  Each region is labeled by a "cost vector" of the form <c, d, t, l>
representing the number of speciations, duplications, transfers, and
losses, respectively, in an optimal solution.  Costscape also prints the 
following information in the terminal window for each region:

* The event count vector and the number of distinct solutions in that region
* The vertices representing the boundary of the region
* The area of the region

SIGSCAPE IN DETAIL

Sigsscape performs randomization trials to determine the fraction of random 
trials whose costs are at least as good as those of the original input 
dataset.  Each trial comprises a permutation of the leaf associations between 
the two trees.

Sigscape then computes an empirical p-value for each combination
of costs, indicating the fraction of random trials whose cost is less than 
or equal to that of the original input data.  The cost space is colored 
green for significance at the 0.01 level, yellow for signficance between 
0.01 and 0.05, and red for lack of significance at the 0.05 level.

Because the permutation testing can be slow for large trees and large number 
of trials, sigscape is multithreaded and prompts for the number of cores 
to allocate to the permutation testing.

EVENTSCAPE IN DETAIL

Eventscape has two modes, Union and Intersection, and the user is prompted
to select one.  In Union mode, each region (i.e., event count vector) records
every event in every reconciliation in that region, that is, the union of 
all events in the reconciliations for that region.  In Intersection mode,
each region records those events that are common to all reconciliations in that
region, that is, the intersection of the events taken over the reconciliations
in that region.  

Eventscape's output .csv file contains one line per region, indicating the 
event count vector for that region, the number of distinct reconciliations, 
followed by a list of the events for that region (either the union or 
intersection, depending on the specified mode of operation).  Next, 
eventscape partitions all of these events into those found in all regions 
down to 1 region. 

The reported events are as follows:

p h eventType

... where p is a node in the parasite tree, h is a node in the host tree, and
eventType is the type of event.  For example...

p5 h4 cospeciation

... means that parasite tree node p5 cospeciates with host node h4.  Similarly,

p5 h4 duplication

... means that parasite tree node p5 duplicates on the edge terminating at h4.
And...

p5 h4 loss h7

... means that the parasite edge terminating at p5 passes through host vertex
h4 and continues on the host edge terminating at h7.

Finally,

p5 h4 switch h9

... means that the parasite node p5 performs a duplication and
switch on the host edge terminating at h4 and one of p5's children switches
to the host edge terminating at h9.

VIEW_TANGLEGRAM

The view_tanglegram program renders the input file (tanglegram).  This is 
particularly useful when interpreting the events that are output by
eventscape.  Run...

view_tanglegram -h 

... to see the command line options.

For example, a typical usage is:

view_tanglegram -n -g outputFile.svg inputFile.newick

The -n option displays the names of the internal nodes in the trees 
(useful for interpreting the eventscape events which refer to these 
internal nodes) and the -g option saves the file to the specified 
.svg output file.  

TREE2NEWICK

Jane users may prefer to use the .tree format because Jane saves files in 
that format (http://www.cs.hmc.edu/~hadas/jane/fileformats.html).  Jane also
has a GUI editor that allows users to construct trees and save them in .tree
format.

A program called tree2newick.py is also provided that is run from 
the command line, prompts the user for the .tree input file name and the 
.newick output file name, and writes the newick tree to the output file.

When using the .tree format, only the HOSTTREE, PARASITETREE, and PHI entries 
are required.  All others are ignored.

Note:  Tip names names in the .tree file must have no whitespace.

ASSUMPTIONS

The trees are untimed and switches are permitted from an edge h to any other
edge h' as long as h' is neither ancestral nor descendant wrt to h.  Timing
incompatabilities are therefore theoretically possible.

VERSION NOTES

Version 0.0.4 fixes a bug present in previous versions.  In particular,
earlier versions would allow a parasite node p on host edge h to switch one
of its children to the same host edge h.  In the event that a switch is 
less expensive than a duplication, these spurious switches would effectively
be duplications but would be counted as switches.  This bug has been
corrected.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS AND DATA SOURCES

The Heliconius example dataset was taken from:

Jennifer Cuthill and Michael Charleston
Phylogenetic Codivergence Supports Coevolution of Mimetic Heliconious 
Butterflies PLoS One 7(5): e36464. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0036464

The Gopher-Louse dataset was taken from:

Hafner MS and Nadler SA
Phylogenetic trees support the coevolution of parasites and their hosts
Nature 1988, 332:258-259 

